From The New York Times, I'm Michael
[music] Barbaro. This is The Daily.
>> [music]
>> Got some breaking news out of Iran. We
are hearing for the [music] first time
from the new supreme leader of Iran.
Today's statement dismissed any [music]
hope of Iran backing down. He says,
"Quote, avenging the blood of your
martyrs is a top priority, and that
attacks [music] on Gulf Arab neighbors
will continue." At the heart of the
Iranian [music] regime's defiant stance
toward the United States and Israel in
this war is its new supreme leader,
Mojtaba Khamenei, the son of the
regime's long-time ruler. [music] He has
said that all US bases should
immediately be closed in the region,
[music]
and he says that those bases will be
attacked as well.
>> on to say that the Strait of Hormuz
should [music] remain closed as a Today,
my colleague, Farnaz Fassihi, on the
extraordinary [music]
behind-the-scenes jockeying that led to
his selection, and the growing consensus
>> [music]
>> that the US and Israeli strategy
motivated Iran to replace one hardline
leader [music]
with another.
>> [music]
>> It's Tuesday, March 17th. [music]
Farnaz, welcome back to the show. I just
want to say at the outset that there are
moments when our colleagues, because of
their area of expertise,
just become indispensable to The Daily,
and you're one of those people. Now,
because you know Iran and its government
inside and out, so thank you for making
time for us. Thank you for having me,
Michael.
Your latest line of reporting has been
focused on Iran's new supreme leader
Mojtaba Khamenei, the son of the
assassinated supreme leader.
And Mojtaba Khamenei is filling a job
that is both essential for the regime's
survival and arguably now the most
dangerous job in the world. And we want
to talk to you about what his selection
means for Iran and the war and the
behind-the-scenes process by which he
was chosen. So, where do you think we
should start?
I think we should start by acknowledging
that Mojtaba Khamenei's rise as the
third supreme leader came as a surprise
to even Iran watchers and insiders in
Iran. Although he was his father's son
and had been working closely with him in
his office, the fact that he would
become a supreme leader and succeed his
father was not straightforward, it
wasn't necessarily predestined, and it's
an irony because the Islamic Revolution
came about so there would be an end to
monarchy rule and power being passed
from father to son.
>> Just explain that. Well, the Islamic
Revolution in 1979
came about as a result of this movement
to topple the Shah and thousands of
years of monarchy where power was handed
from father to son with this idea that
power would go back to the people. Even
when the first supreme leader, the
founding father of the revolution,
Ayatollah Khomeini, died, power didn't
go to his son or to his relatives, it
went to then the president, the former
Ayatollah Khomeini. So, that's why it's
an irony to now have his son appointed
as his successor. Fascinating. So, the
choice of Khamenei's son, Mojtaba
Khamenei, you're saying
is in many ways a violation of the
revolution's core spirit. So, talk to us
about how that ever would have occurred
over the past many days.
When I talked to sources in Iran about
the appointment and selection of Mojtaba
Khamenei, they described it as a
succession war.
>> Hmm. As various political factions,
generals from the Revolutionary Guards,
powerful people like the former spy
chief of the Guards, and clerics all
vying for power to have the candidate
that they preferred in the role. It was
explained to me as sort of the Islamic
Republic's version of Game of Thrones,
vying for power, different factions
competing to have their favorite
candidate in, and really as a war of
succession. Wow. Well, describe these
main factions in this selection process,
who they are and what they want.
So, constitutionally
in Iran, the Assembly of Experts, which
is a body of 88 elected senior clerics,
has the task of appointing, supervising,
and removing a supreme leader. So, this
is the body that had to get together,
debate, and vote for who would basically
succeed Ayatollah Khamenei. But, it's
much more complicated than that, right?
There's all this like backdoor and
back-channeling powers and different
factions trying to influence the vote of
the clerics.
>> Mhm. We had on one side the moderates
and the pragmatics led by the head of
the National Security Council, Ali
Larijani, and President Pezeshkian in
this camp. And they were sort of arguing
that this is really an extraordinary
moment in Iran, we're at war with the
United States and Israel, we've had
months and months of upheaval with
protests and whatnot, and maybe it's
time to put a new face on the regime and
pick a candidate that would at least
signal to the world and to Iranian
public that we're thinking of moderating
our policies or we're thinking of
reform. So basically recognize that the
war is a fundamental breaking point.
It's a moment from which the country
cannot really go back that a change is
required here. Exactly. The war, don't
forget, was preceded with massive street
uprisings and protests by Iranians
saying we want an end of this regime. So
while they can't really satisfy that
desire, I think the moderates were
arguing, well, at least maybe this power
vacuum we have from the assassination of
the Ayatollah allows us a space to try
to steer the country in a different
direction. And for us, who do these
moderates, and I want to be careful with
that word, because moderates within a
theocracy may not resemble moderates
outside of a theocracy, but who do they
look to specifically
as they try to make this choice?
Well, they were looking at several
candidates. One of them was former
President Hassan Rouhani. He's mostly a
centrist politician who served eight
years as president and before that had
very senior leadership roles in in
security apparatus. He led the 2015
negotiations, nuclear negotiations with
the United States and world powers. And
he's increasingly become vocal in giving
speeches about how the status quo was
not tenable. So the second candidate was
Hassan Khomeini, the grandson of the
founding father of the revolution, who
is clearly identified his politics as
reformist and he's part of the reformist
faction. And then there was a third
candidate who is not very well known in
the public, Alireza Arafi. He has
religious credentials. He ran a very
successful charity, religious charity,
and he was sort of considered as someone
who would be easy to manage because he
didn't really have experience in
security or policy or defense, and sort
of would fall somewhere in the middle.
So, all three of these say to the world,
to varying degrees, turn the page on
the revolutionary hardline Iranian ethos
that has dominated since 1979.
That was basically the idea. Now, with
the caveat, as you mentioned, that these
are all still part of the Islamic
Republic's establishment, and they are
loyal to the ideology of the Islamic
Republic, but they have varying shades
of how to pragmatically and practically
practice that and enforce it. And I
think if they had gone this way, they
would have at least signaled that maybe
we're open to change, maybe we're even
open to scaling down hostilities with
the United States. But, that's not how
it went. Clearly. Okay, well, what about
the hardline
faction?
>> [snorts]
>> So, the hardline faction, particularly
the Revolutionary Guards Corps, they
were interested in making sure that,
first of all, at wartime, there would be
no concessions made, no surrendering to
US demands, that sort of the policies
and strategies that the Ayatollah and
the Guards had defined would hold as the
war continued. The Revolutionary Guards
are very powerful in Iran. They're
represented in politics, they control
the economy, they are more powerful than
the military, the army itself, and
they're now in charge of basically
commanding this war because they're in
charge of defending Iran's borders. So,
for the Guards, the election or the
appointment of the Supreme Leader was
was also an existential choice because
they wanted to make sure that their
power and their grip on power remains.
And who is in this hardline faction's
pool of candidates for supreme leader?
This pool wanted Mojtaba Khamenei.
Unanimously, he was the candidate of
choice.
>> Mhm. They viewed him as a very close
ally, as a reincarnation, if you may, of
Ayatollah Khamenei, who would continue
his policies and give the guards a free
hand, particularly in running this war.
And to this end, they were willing to
toss out this whole idea of power should
not be hereditary in the Islamic
Republic. Interesting. They just sort of
said, "That's a formality we don't care
about in the middle of this conflict.
Who cares?" Right. I mean, they
basically said, "This is wartime. The
circumstances are extreme, and our
former supreme leader, or they consider
him a martyr." And a lot of the anger
and resentment against President Trump
and Prime Minister Netanyahu was being
fueled into the sense of defiance,
right? A lot of experts I talked to you
in Iran and outside of Iran said that,
"Look, if Khamenei had died a natural
death, Mojtaba would have a lot of
resistance. But now, the guards and the
hardliners could argue that, 'Look, you
know, they martyred our supreme leader,
and who is the closest thing we can get
to him? His son, who not only physically
looks like him, but also worked in his
office, and as far as we know, has the
same ideological beliefs and policies.'"
Okay, so with all this in mind, how does
the formal process of choosing Mojtaba
Khamenei ultimately unfold? You describe
it as filled with intrigue and drama,
Game of Thrones. What does it look like?
The process of selecting the supreme
leader began
almost immediately after Ayatollah
Khamenei was killed in airstrikes on the
first day of the war.
And there was some back channeling and
influencing and whatnot. So, you know,
when they were debating, they were like
fueled with this idea that we have to be
defiant. Finding somebody who's a new
face is not our priority. What's our
priority is to tell the world that we
continue our revolutionary ideology.
>> [snorts]
>> So, Mojtaba emerges a frontrunner. They
took a vote and they told the
government, "Now we have a supreme
leader, it's Mojtaba." And they were
supposed to announce it the next morning
at dawn at state television. But that
plan kind of fell apart. Why? Well,
first of all, as soon as it was leaked
and we reported it, it was a New York
Times scoop that he's emerged as a
leading candidate. Both President Trump
and Israel's defense minister threatened
to eliminate the next successor to the
supreme leader.
So, Iranians paused. They thought that
maybe this is not the right time to
announce Mojtaba as the supreme leader
because it could threaten his life. Wow.
And this provides space for the
moderates to launch an offensive to try
to get the assembly to recede at the
vote and redo the vote, right? They're
like, "Okay, now it hasn't been
announced publicly.
Maybe we have some time to try to now
lobby and jockey for power and try to
get them to change their minds." Right.
And if you needed evidence that
moderation was perhaps the right course,
the fact that Israel and the US were
saying, "We're going to kill this
hardline successor to the last
Ayatollah" might fuel your case. So, how
close did the moderates get to
unraveling this choice? Well, first of
all, they needed a really good excuse,
right? It wasn't going to be easy to get
them to change their mind. So, they
called for the Assembly's Leadership
Council or Leadership Committee to meet
them in person.
And at that meeting, representatives of
the moderates put a card on the table
that really stunned the clerics. [music]
They brought two of his father's closest
aides,
his chief of staff
and one of his top senior military
advisors to testify to the Assembly of
Clerics that his father, the late
Ayatollah Khomeini, had told them he had
said he does not want his son to [music]
succeed him. Oh, wow. There are people
willing to say essentially under oath
that the last supreme leader does not
want his son to be the next supreme
leader.
>> That's exactly what happened, and it
wasn't
>> And that's kind of the word of God.
>> Right. And it wasn't just anybody. It
was like literally his two closest
allies. Wow.
>> And then they throw another hurdle. They
bring a letter in writing from Mr.
[music] Khomeini that they say, "This is
his will, and it was sealed, and now
we're unsealing it, and here
>> [music]
>> it says that I don't want any of my
family members to become the supreme
leader." This really is Game of Thrones.
>> It's totally Game [music] of Thrones.
So, there are all these things being
thrown at them saying, "You need [music]
to reconsider. Like, we have evidence
that suggests this is not what Ayatollah
Khomeini wants, right?"
So, the hardliners and the generals in
the Revolutionary Guards hear about
[music] this, and they mobilize also and
launch a counteroffensive [music]
to convince the clerics to vote for
Mojtaba Khomeini. So, the generals and a
former [music] spy chief of the guards,
Hussein Taeb, personally called members
of the assembly [music] and asked them
to meet virtually and have an emergency
vote and announce Mojtaba as the leader,
>> [music]
>> and that is what happened.
On Sunday, March 8th, the assembly held
a final vote, and Mojtaba Khamenei
received the [music] 2/3 majority of
votes he needed. Essentially, elected
for a second time, but this time it's
stuck.
>> Yes, it stuck. They announced it and
sealed the deal.
You know, given the sequence of events
you've just described and all of this
extraordinary politicking and everyone
trying to undermine the other side,
that it feels like we only get this
person as supreme leader because of the
unique circumstances we're in, the US
and Israel being at war with Iran.
Right. I mean, I think that if Iran was
not at war right now and under attack by
US and Israel, and if Ayatollah Khamenei
had not been killed by air strikes,
Mojtaba would probably not be the
supreme leader.
And so now, of course, the question is
who is this new supreme leader? And is
he as hardline as those who supported
him and the moderate who feared him
say that he is?
Mojtaba Khamenei is a mysterious figure,
Michael.
He [snorts]
hasn't really been in the public realm.
He's always operated in the shadows of
power, and since he was named the
supreme leader, no one has heard his
voice, no one has seen him. He's only
issued two statements, but I've spent
the past 2 weeks talking to sources in
Iran who know him or who have met him to
try to figure out who he is and how he
will rule Iran.
>> [music]
>> We'll be right back.
So, Farnaz, tell us as much as you have
come to understand about this new
supreme leader who, besides enjoying the
support of hardliners, remains such a
mystery still.
Mojtaba Khamenei was born in 1969.
He was 9 years old when the Islamic
Revolution came about and theocracy was
established.
And as his father sort of rose in the
ranks of the revolution all the way to
becoming the president and then as the
second supreme leader, Mojtaba also grew
up in that very ideological, very
religious early years of the revolution.
He's kind of witnessing the, as you've
described it in previous episodes, the
institutionalization
of the revolution from idea to
day-to-day governance. Exactly. But he's
not just an observer. As he grows up, a
becomes a teenager, he participates in
revolutionary Iran.
About a year after the revolution,
Saddam Hussein invaded
Iran and it started an 8-year bloody war
between Iran and Iraq. And many young
men in Iran who were supporters of the
revolution volunteered as teenagers,
some as young as 13 and 14 to go to the
battlefields.
And Mojtaba was one of them. He
volunteered
>> [music]
>> as a soldier when he was 17 years old
and went to the front lines of the war.
And he is in a brigade where many of the
current generals and [music] senior
leadership of Iran's military were also
in that battalion. So he bonds with
these people and gets veteran
credentials as someone [music] who was
willing to sort of leave the comfort of
his home and go fight. And that's where
many of his powerful alliances with the
current generals
>> [music]
>> start in the battlefields of the
Iran-Iraq War.
Right, he has real street cred. He
fought a war that in theory the son of
someone as powerful as his dad doesn't
necessarily need to fight.
Right, so after the war he moves to Qom,
the seat of Shia seminaries and one of
the centers of the Shia faith, to study
and become a Shia jurist and a cleric
and a scholar. And he gets married to
the daughter of a political family. He
sort of climbs the ranks of religious
hierarchy and he starts teaching
advanced Islamic jurisprudence, which is
a level of religious teaching that you
can only teach if you yourself are an
advanced cleric in the Shia hierarchy.
So he's holding these classes in Qom in
the seminaries and the classes become
very popular. Lots of young clerics are
signing up. Which I should say suggests
a certain level of charisma perhaps.
Well, it's it's hard to say I guess like
in the eyes of his students maybe he was
charismatic and popular, but we haven't
really seen him in public to really be
able to judge that. So he then stops the
teachings because apparently they were
oversubscribed and too popular and moves
to [clears throat] Tehran and enters his
father's close political circle and
starts building alliances with very
powerful generals and security people
and basically becomes in in charge of
managing the security and military
administrative things of his father's
office. He is very close to the former
Revolutionary Guard's intelligence
chief, Hossein Taeb, and to General
Mohammad Baqer Qalibaf as a commander of
the Revolutionary Guards who's now the
speaker of the parliament and the three
of them, according to my sources, would
hold meetings once a week and there they
would discuss and strategize
the policies and sort of the plans that
they wanted and that went from who they
wanted to see elected in in office to
the way that they would want crackdowns
on dissidents and other security matters
of the state.
So, he's quite clearly becoming an
extremely powerful behind-the-scenes
figure in his own right. I'm curious
if you have come across any specific
examples
of actions he took, decisions he made
that help us understand how he viewed
that power and used it.
One of the examples that we know of and
many people I've talked to point out is
the 2009
presidential election of former
president Mahmoud Ahmadinejad.
In Iran, where President Mahmoud
Ahmadinejad has declared victory, he's
actually speaking. Young people
especially are angered by what they
believe to be a rigged election that
defeated the reform candidate
Mir-Hossein Mousavi. Where the election
results were contested.
>> "I just can't believe this election
result. I'm so furious," said Ash Bali.
And it started a movement called the
Green Movement. An outpouring of anger
like this hasn't been seen in more than
a decade. We really saw the first real
>> [music]
>> big nationwide protests of people coming
out and saying the elections were
rigged. Iran's supreme leader is calling
for restraint, saying protesters will be
held responsible for any additional
chaos. And from the interviews that I've
had with people who are in Iran and
remember that say that Mojtaba Khamenei
played a role in what they alleged was
rigging of the elections in Mr.
Ahmadinejad's favor and also Police
fought back by firing tear gas and water
cannons. Former clan police attacking
protesters from the backs of speeding
motorcycles. encouraging and
orchestrating the crackdowns,
particularly his ties to the Basij
[music] paramilitary plainclothes
militia of the Revolutionary Guards.
Human rights groups agree more than 300
remain in detention, and at least 30 are
dead. kind of authorizing them to go to
the streets and really crush the
protests as they were.
>> [music]
>> So, this really underscores why the
hardliners in the regime over the past
few weeks would have looked to Mojtaba
Khamenei and said, "This guy is with us.
He's our guy."
The story of Mojtaba's rise very much
parallels the story of the Revolutionary
Guards rise and control of of Iran
politically, militarily, and
economically. Their stories are
intertwined.
But, also, as much as he operated in the
shadows of power and gained prominence
in his father's world, he was not really
reaching out to the public, right? If
you're thinking like one day you're
going to be the supreme leader of Iran
and ruling over at least your own
constituents, never mind the population
that criticizes the regime, but sort of
that 20% that's the core constituents.
He never made any public outreach. He he
never really came to attend a Friday
prayer or deliver a public speech or
attend any sort of social or religious
event. He was sort of just someone
really a mysterious figure in the
backgrounds and backrooms of power. So,
it makes it even more remarkable that
suddenly he is now their religious
leader, where they don't really even
know him.
Right, And that has been reinforced, and
you mentioned this earlier, by the fact
that since his appointment as supreme
leader, as Ayatollah, he has given the
public pretty much nothing to work with.
No speech, no video, nothing kind of
tangible or emotional to say to the
Iranian public,
"This is who I am and you should
believe in me." Which is a little bit
baffling.
Well, there are two reasons for that, as
far as we can tell from our reporting.
One is that Mojtaba is injured. He at
least has injuries to his legs. So, he
may not be in top physical shape to
record a video. The other reason is that
we know that he's number one on Israel's
uh target list, and the Iranians know
that, and they say that we will not put
him in front of a video because they
could geo-locate him and assassinate
him. I mean, everything you're
describing here, collectively, his
entire journey up through the ranks of
the regime's government,
his role in the military, his crackdowns
on demonstrators,
and this latest attack, which has killed
his father, all of that suggests that he
will
be a hardliner. That this is not a
hardliner who's going to surprise us all
in a few weeks or months, necessarily,
and become a reformer. And that seems to
have been manifested by Iran's
decision-making since his appointment. I
mean, Iran has been nothing if not
defiant and aggressive in its public
statements, in its shutdown of the
Strait of Hormuz. So, we seem to be
looking at perhaps an even more hardline
figure than
his father?
This is a man whose father, wife, and
son were killed by the United States and
Israel. So, we have to think about
whether revenge is going to drive any of
his policy decisions, right? In the two
statements, written statements that
we've seen from him, the first one said
that Iran's military forces will
continue to strike at regional countries
that aid the American military. So, he
didn't stand down from that. And today,
he issued a state very short statement
saying that he was going to keep all the
appointments his father made politically
and militarily. So, again saying, you
know, I want my father's policies and
strategy of this war to remain. I want
all his generals to remain and carry on
his directives. I mean, some of his
supporters that I've talked to, some of
the people who know him well, are trying
to portray him as a Mohammad bin Salman
figure of Saudi Arabia, right? They're
like, "No, no, he may look
and his father's son, but actually he's
progressive. And if anyone can really
bring down hostilities with the United
States or forgive the United States, it
would be him because anyone else doing
this would meet the wrath of the Lack
the credibility. Lack the credibility or
lack what would face resistance, but if
anyone can actually enter a ceasefire
and convince the hardliners, it would be
him. So, there is a camp that's trying
to promote him as an MBS figure, but we
have no evidence of that, right? Other
than what people are saying, all the
evidence points otherwise.
In the opposite, right. Well, in that
case, Farnaz,
is there a case to be made that the
United States and Israel have given Iran
exactly
the leader of the regime that they said
at the outset of this war that they were
seeking to eliminate, overthrow, and
avoid? And that would be a pretty ironic
outcome here.
Many people in Iran point to that. They
say that the United States and Israel
said that they were going to come and
liberate us from the rule of this
regime, but so far in third week of war,
not only we're seeing vast destruction
and ruin of our country from residential
homes to police precincts to critical
infrastructure, airports, factories,
cultural gems and heritage, now we have
the Ayatollah's son as our leader. So,
it's very disappointing to most Iranians
if this is in indeed the final outcome
of the war.
You had talked about the 80% of Iranians
who wanted there to be a change. That
was the math you described in our last
episode, and it sounds like you're
saying that the elevation of Mojtaba
Khamenei as the new supreme leader
must be a real shock to the system
for those who let themselves believe at
the outset of this war that maybe there
would be the kind of change that would
open Iran
up to something else.
Um I think, Michael, that moment of hope
that we discussed the last time we spoke
was real but brief.
In the third week of the war, as Iran
has stated [music]
Mojtaba Khamenei as its supreme leader
and there's no signs [music] that it's
going to change its policies or make any
major concessions, [music] Iranians are
under relentless bombing and air strikes
campaign by Israel and the United
States, [music] and they're afraid.
They're afraid of the war, they're
afraid of this war spreading,
and [music]
pretty much every night I get text
messages from people who live in Iran
saying
>> [music]
>> tonight the sounds of the explosion were
much louder than before. They were
closer than before. So it [music] feels
like fear and anxiety has replaced hope.
Wfornaz,
>> [music]
>> thank you very much. We appreciate it.
Thank you very much for having me,
Michael.
We'll be right back.
>> [music]
>> Here's what else you need to know today.
And I've been a big critic of all of the
protecting of countries because I know
that we'll protect them.
>> [music]
>> And
if ever needed, if we ever needed help,
they won't be there for us. I'm just On
Monday, President Trump discouraged US
allies who have so far rejected his call
to use their military to escort cargo
ships [music] in and out of the Strait
of Hormuz, which Iran has largely shut
down during the war. [music]
In pointed remarks, Trump claimed that
the refusal amounted to ingratitude from
countries like Germany and Japan [music]
after the US military protected them for
decades. You mean for 40 years we're
protecting you and you don't want to get
involved in something that is very
minor. Very few shots going to be taken
cuz they don't have many shots left.
But they said we'd rather not uh
get involved. Trump's inability to end
the standoff in the Strait has roiled
the global economy,
raising oil [music] prices sharply and
becoming a major frustration for the
president.
And
>> [music]
>> in a sweeping decision, a federal judge
has blocked many of the major decisions
[music] made by the Trump administration
about vaccines over the past year.
Those decisions include cutting down the
number of diseases [music] covered by
routine immunizations, including
hepatitis B for newborns, and
restricting [music]
access to COVID vaccines.
The judge said that those decisions
bypassed normal procedures
>> [music]
>> and abandoned traditional scientific
expertise.
The White House said it would appeal the
judge's ruling.
>> [music]
>> Today's episode [music] was produced by
Astha Chaturvedi, Mouge Zaidy, and
Stella Tan.
It was edited by Mark George, contains
music [music]
by Mary Lozano, Chelsea Daniel, Will
Reed, Rowan Nemixto, and Dan Powell.
Our theme music [music] is by Wonderly.
This episode was engineered by Chris
Wood.
>> [music]
>> That's [music] it for The Daily.
I'm Michael Barbaro.
See you tomorrow.